IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

5211314

Category-Oriented Localization Distillation for SAR
Object Detection and a Unified Benchmark
Chao Wang , Rui Ruan , Zhicheng Zhao , Chenglong Li , and Jin Tang

Abstract— Despite much research progress in synthetic
aperture radar (SAR) object detection, the performance of SAR
object detection has encountered a bottleneck limited by the
imaging mechanism of SAR. In this work, we investigate how to
perform robust SAR object detection by distilling the category
knowledge from optical images in the training stage. To this end,
we propose a novel knowledge distillation (KD) method called
category-oriented localization distillation (CoLD), which employs
the optical object detection network as the teacher to guide the
SAR object detection network. To introduce the category prior
knowledge of the teacher network in the localization knowledge
transferring, a category-oriented partition module (CPM) is
designed in CoLD to decouple candidate bounding boxes into
target and nontarget ones according to the category information
in optical images. Through box decoupling, the accuracy and
efficiency of SAR object detection can be significantly improved.
Moreover, an intersection over union (IoU)-based weighting
module (IWM) is introduced in CoLD to guide the student
network focusing more on high-quality candidate boxes by
adaptively changing the weight of each candidate bounding box
based on the corresponding IoU score in the teacher network.
In addition, a unified benchmark dataset is created for the
evaluation of optical information-guided SAR object detection,
which consists of 14 665 optical and SAR image pairs in the
training set and 3666 SAR images in the testing set. Extensive
experiments on the dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our
CoLD against state-of-the-art methods. The dataset is available
at: https://github.com/mmic-lcl/Datasets-and-benchmark-code.
Manuscript received 8 January 2023; revised 16 April 2023 and 30 May
2023; accepted 23 June 2023. Date of publication 30 June 2023; date of
current version 13 July 2023. This work was supported in part by the Joint
Funds of the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
U20B2068, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant 62076003, in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Anhui
Province under Grant 2208085J18 and Grant 2208085QF192, in part by the
Natural Science Foundation of Anhui Higher Education Institution under
Grant 2022AH040014, and in part by the University Synergy Innovation
Program of Anhui Province under Grant GXXT-2022-033. (Corresponding
authors: Chenglong Li; Rui Ruan.)
Chao Wang and Jin Tang are with the Anhui Provincial Key
Laboratory of Multimodal Cognitive Computation, School of Computer
Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei 230601, China (e-mail:
e21201065@stu.ahu.edu.cn; tangjin@ahu.edu.cn).
Rui Ruan is with the Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Multimodal
Cognitive Computation, School of Internet, Anhui University, Hefei 230601,
China (e-mail: ruanrui@ahu.edu.cn).
Zhicheng Zhao is with the Information Materials and Intelligent Sensing
Laboratory of Anhui Province, Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of
Multimodal Cognitive Computation, School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui
University, Hefei 230601, China, and also with the 38th Research Institute,
China Electronics Technology Group Corporation, Hefei 230088, China
(e-mail: zhaozhicheng@ahu.edu.cn).
Chenglong Li is with the Information Materials and Intelligent Sensing
Laboratory of Anhui Province, Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of
Multimodal Cognitive Computation, School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui
University, Hefei 230601, China (e-mail: lcl1314@foxmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2023.3291356

Index Terms— Knowledge distillation (KD), multimodal
remote sensing datasets, object detection, synthetic aperture
radar (SAR).

I. I NTRODUCTION

S

YNTHETIC aperture radar (SAR) offers persistency
and endurability in challenging environments, which are
widely used in military reconnaissance, exploration and guidance [1], [2], such as recognizing significant objects including
bridges, harbors and oil tanks. The imaging mechanisms of
SAR sensors and optical sensors are fundamentally different.
SAR generates images by actively illuminating the ground
objects with radio waves and receiving the backscattering
energy formed by each independent scattering unit of the
corresponding object. Thus, SAR images can provide more
valuable information than optical images when cloud cover
obstructs objects. But, the pixel value in the SAR image
represents how much radar energy is reflected by the sensor,
which results in the boundaries of ground objects having poor
continuity and integrity. Taking the oil tank in Fig. 1 as an
example, a severe substantial scattering interference exists
between the object and its background, which is difficult to
distinguish even for experts. Therefore, SAR object detection
still continues to encounter substantial obstacles.
In recent years, SAR object detection methods [3], [4] have
significantly improved performance through convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) to extract more discriminative
features and richer semantic information from SAR images.
Despite the excellent performance of CNNs in computer
vision tasks, their ability to model relationships between
samples is limited, and they cannot effectively extract and
represent sequential properties of spectral features. Therefore,
Hong et al. propose a new minibatch graph convolutional
networks (miniGCN) [5] and a new backbone network
structure (SpectralFormer) [6], to improve the model’s
performance. The miniGCN can be trained in small batches
and attempts to find better and more robust local optima.
SpectralFormer reduces the loss of valuable information during
hierarchical propagation to better represent the sequential
properties of spectral features. In particular, ORSIm [7]
and UIU-Net [8] integrate multichannel feature extraction,
fast image pyramid matching and enhancement strategies,
and learn the features that effectively enhance global and
local contrast information. For SAR images, Du et al. [9]
embed a multiscale feature attention module (MFAM) in
the network to achieve a better detection performance in

1558-0644 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:12:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5211314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

Fig. 1. Visualization results of the same regions in optical and SAR image
pairs. There are correlation and complementary information between SAR and
optical images. The methods based on multimodal feature fusion require pairs
of images in both the training and inference stages, which greatly limits the
application scene. Our proposed CoLD employs the optical object detection
network as the teacher to guide the SAR object detection network. In this
way, the knowledge of the optical object detection network is well transferred
and only the SAR images are required in the inference stage. It is obvious that
the proposed CoLD can extract more discriminative features for the objects
in red dashed boxes with guidance of optical images.

SAR images under complex scenes. Cui et al. [10] densely
connect the convolutional block attention module (CBAM)
to each concatenated feature map to obtain rich features
containing resolution and semantic information for multiscale
ship detection. However, due to the limitations of the SAR
imaging mechanism, the performance of SAR object detection
meets a bottleneck. As shown in the first row of Fig. 1, the
object detection methods have the difficulty in extracting more
discriminative features from the SAR image, which leads to
unsatisfactory detection results. With the rapid development
of satellite technology, images of the same area captured by
different types of satellites are available. Hou and Zheng [11]
start to generate corresponding optical images by generative
adversarial networks and then use optical images of the same
region to compensate for the shortcomings of SAR object
detection methods. These methods require paired data for
inference, however paired data are difficult to obtain at the
same time in real-world scenarios.
Cross-modal knowledge distillation (KD) is an effective
solution, which requires only SAR images in the inference
stage. Wang et al. [12] extract features directly from the
different modalities for distillation, where features extracted
from the teacher network are used to supervise the student
network. Since there is a big gap between optical images
and SAR images, Zhang et al. [13] extract knowledge of
the optical branch by aligning the activation distributions of
the two modalities. Zheng et al. [14] propose a localization
distillation method to transfer location knowledge. However,
the coupled Kullback–Leibler (KL) limits the efficiency
of transferring candidate bounding boxes and categories.
Although Zhao et al. [15] decouple KL into two parts
to efficiently transfer location knowledge, it entails a

high-computational cost. Cross-modal KD of optical and SAR
images is a very promising task.
However, due to sensor limitations, it is difficult to acquire
simultaneous optical and SAR data in realistic scenarios.
In particular, there is a lack of high-quality and wellannotated public datasets. To this end, we aim to achieve
robust SAR object detection by extracting category knowledge
from optical images and build a unified benchmark dataset
for the evaluation of optical information-guided SAR object
detection. To effectively leverage the category prior knowledge
in optical images, we propose a category-oriented localization
distillation (CoLD) method, which improves the performance
of SAR object detection by distilling the category knowledge
from optical images. In specific, we design a categoryoriented partition module (CPM) that separates candidate
bounding boxes into target and nontarget ones using optical
image category information. CPM can generate candidate
bounding boxes with rich category knowledge while reducing
the expensive computational costs of transferring localization
knowledge. Considering that the quality of candidate bounding
boxes is greatly different, we propose an intersection over
union (IoU)-based weighting module (IWM) that adaptively
guides the student network to focus on high-quality candidate
boxes by the corresponding IoU scores in the teacher network.
Our dataset, called optical image guided SAR image object
detection (OGSOD-1.0), is a dataset for optical imageguided SAR image multiobject detection, where the training
set consists of 14 665 optical and SAR image pairs and
the testing set consists of 3666 SAR images. Extensive
experiments on the dataset OGSOD-1.0 show that our method
can effectively improve the performance of SAR detectors
with CoLD.
In summary, the contributions of this article can be
summarized as follows.
1) We propose a novel cross-modal localization distillation
method called CoLD, which mines and leverages
category prior knowledge to empower the student
network only in the training stage. In the inference stage,
we only use SAR images, this manner greatly extends
the application scenario.
2) To embed category prior information efficiently,
we design a CPM to obtain informative localization
knowledge. The module can reduce the expensive
computational costs of transferring localization knowledge while introducing category prior knowledge.
Furthermore, to improve the efficiency of localization
distillation, we design an IWM. This module can
guide the network to focus on high-quality localization
knowledge in an adaptive manner.
3) To the best of our knowledge, the OGSOD-1.0 is
the first multicategory and well-annotated SAR-Optical
benchmark dataset for optical image-guided SAR image
in multiobject detection tasks.
4) Extensive experiments on our proposed dataset are
carried out to demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed CoLD. Compared with existing cross-modal
and SAR object detection methods, the results show
that our method can effectively exploit the knowledge

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:12:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CoLD FOR SAR OBJECT DETECTION AND A UNIFIED BENCHMARK

in optical images to improve the performance of SAR
object detection.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we review the recent progress of SAR object
detection methods, multimodal object detection methods, and
cross-modal KD methods.
A. SAR Object Detection Methods
Traditional method constant false alarm rate (CFAR) [16]
relies mainly on hand-crafted features based on object
structure and scattering. CFAR method works well in simple
situations. However, when the practical scenarios are more
complex, it will be difficult to select a helpful model for clutter
statistical distribution. Once the clutter statistical distribution [17] model is not appropriate, performance will degrade.
Zhang and Liu [18] use enhanced directional smoothing (EDS)
to remove speckle noise from SAR images to improve detection performance. Traditional SAR object detection methods
often rely on handcrafted features, and the implementation
process is complex. It is difficult to achieve good detection
results in complex scenes, and its generalization ability
is poor.
With the rapid advancement of deep learning theory,
CNNs have been successfully applied to image classification
and object detection. Deep feature descriptors obtained
by CNN have gradually replaced traditional handcrafted
descriptors. Numerous researchers [19], [20] advance many
object detectors using the CNN framework. The raw images
could be tested as inputs to generate desired prediction
results as long as the network is trained with enough images
and labels. When the scene becomes more complex, objects
in SAR images are disturbed by noise and clutter in the
background. It becomes more difficult to locate and classify.
To solve this problem, Wu et al. [21] map the features of the
image to the interaction space to learn the relationship between
the ship and the background.
These methods mainly extract the texture and structural
features, but the weak representation of this information in
SAR images makes SAR object detection methods hit a
bottleneck.
B. Multimodal Object Detection Methods
In recent years, with the rapid development of satellite
technology, there exists complementarity among the information obtained by different satellites in the same area.
Therefore, Hong et al. propose a shared and specific feature
learning (S2FL) [22] model and a general multimodal deep
learning (MDL) [23] framework. S2FL can decompose the
heterogeneous data sources of remote sensing data into
multishared and multispecific components, thereby enabling
more effective fusion of multimodal information. Domain
adaptation-based multi-source change detection network
(DA-MSCDNet) [24] employs feature-level transformation
to align inconsistent deep feature spaces in heterogeneous
data to enhance the interaction between optical and SAR

5211314

image features. Gao et al. [25] construct a plug-and-play
interactive attention sum-max fusion module (IASM) to
interact with features from multimodal images. However, there
are significant gaps between SAR and optical images, and
it is very difficult to achieve strict feature alignment due to
the imaging mechanism. Hence, Shi et al. [26] propose an
unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) framework based on
progressive transfer for SAR ship detection by transferring
knowledge from the optical domain to the SAR domain.
These methods usually require pairs of SAR-Optical data for
inference, which are difficult to obtain simultaneously in realworld scenarios.
C. Cross-Modal Knowledge Distillation Methods
Early KD [27] is used for image classification and
produces impressive results. Chen et al. [28] create a fastto-execute student model to mimic a large teacher network.
For object detection, knowledge transfer is more challenging
than classification tasks. Early method [29] uses the features
of the objects and their context as the distillation objective.
Guo et al. [30] achieves better distillation performance by
adjusting the weights of different locations of the feature
maps. The work of [31] shows that the original Logit-based
model is less efficient for object detection with low efficiency
because it can only transfer some information associated
with classification while ignoring other information associated with localization. Hence, Zheng et al. [14] introduce a
localization distillation method, and proposes to separately
transfer classification and localization knowledge based on
localization regions accordingly, thereby improving distillation
performance greatly. However, these methods usually focus
on single-modality data and cannot adapt well to cross-modal
object detection.
Recently, KD has been used for cross-modal learning. The
aim of cross-modal KD is to transfer knowledge between
different modalities. This approach relies more on paired data
and extracts features from the same location directly from
different data for distillation, where the features extracted
by the teacher network are used to supervise the student
network. This distillation method works well for a variety
of cross-modal tasks, such as between optical and SAR
images object detection [32], depth and RGB images object
detection [33]. State-of-the-art distillation methods are mainly
based on distilling deep features from intermediate layers,
but the significance of logit distillation is greatly overlooked.
Meanwhile, as the semantic knowledge and the localization
are mixed on the feature maps, it is hard to tell whether
it is beneficial to the performance to transfer the hybrid
knowledge for each location. Our task is to use optical
images to complement SAR images for object detection,
thus logit mimicking-based distillation is more effective.
Zheng et al. [14] prove that logit mimicking can be better than
feature imitation. Zhao et al. [15] reformulate the classical
KD loss into two parts, target class KD (TCKD) and nontarget
class KD (NCKD), and reveal that the coupled formulation
of KD limits the effectiveness and flexibility of knowledge
transfer.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:12:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5211314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

Fig. 2. Overall framework of our CoLD, where TCB denotes target category bounding boxes and NCB denotes nontarget category bounding boxes. A prior
knowledge of the optical images is introduced using a specially designed CPM, and candidate bounding boxes with rich knowledge are obtained. An IWM
then adaptively focuses on high-quality candidate bounding boxes in the teacher network based on the corresponding IoU score. Finally, only SAR images
are input for inference. (a) CPM. (b) IWM.

III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
The overall framework of CoLD is discussed in
Section III-A. The proposed CPM and IWM are discussed
in Sections III-B and III-C, respectively. The loss function of
CoLD is discussed in Section III-D.
A. Overall Framework
Optical images are rich in category prior knowledge and
it is critical to make full use of this knowledge to aid SAR
object detection. Considering the great progress made by
YOLOv5 [34] in the field of image object detection, we select
the model as our baseline. Based on YOLOv5, we propose a
novel CoLD to efficiently leverage different knowledge from
optical images for SAR image object detection. CoLD uses
optical images to train the teacher network and SAR images
to train the student network, and only use SAR images to
inference. As shown in Fig. 2, our CoLD mainly contains two
parts: CPM and IWM.
First, to introduce the category prior knowledge of the
teacher network in the localization knowledge transfer,
we design the CPM. As shown in Fig. 2(a), the CPM is the
core component of our CoLD. The CPM divides candidate
bounding boxes into target and nontarget categories based on
the optical image category. We then utilize the probability
distribution representation of the bounding box to indicate the
object’s location. Second, to help the student network focus
on high-quality bounding boxes, an IWM is designed that
adaptively modifies the weight of each candidate bounding box
depending on the matching IoU score in the teacher network.
The structure of the IWM is shown in Fig. 2(b).

B. Category-Oriented Partition Module
Existing localization distillation methods mostly use KLDivergence loss, which generates coupled bounding boxes.
However, coupled bounding boxes can severely suppress
knowledge transfer among nontarget boxes. Decoupling the
bounding boxes directly can lead to expensive computational
costs and make KD much less effective. And these methods
do not make full use of category prior knowledge in optical
images, limiting the performance of object detection.
To embed category prior information and reduce the
computational costs of transferring localization knowledge,
we design a CPM module. The CPM generates decoupled
bounding box distributions by classifying bounding boxes into
target bounding boxes and nontarget bounding boxes based
on the category of the optical image. To make effective use
of logit mimicking for KD, we convert the bounding box
into a probability distribution [35] to better describe object
localization information. As shown in Fig. 2(a), the CPM not
only efficiently introduces prior knowledge of the category
in the optical image but also improves the computational
efficiency of transferring localization knowledge. The CPM
will be discussed in detail in Sections III-B1 and III-B2.
1) Probability Distribution of the Bounding boxes: In
conventional representations, there are three kinds of bounding
boxes: [x, y, w, h], [xmin , ymin , xmax , ymax ], and [t, b, l, r ].
They employ the Dirac delta distribution solely for groundtruth (GT) locations, which cannot account for the ambiguity
in bounding boxes. We represent the bounding box with
a probability distribution that appropriately captures the
uncertainty in its location. Assume y ∈ B is an edge of a
bounding box. The detection model may provide us with the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:12:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CoLD FOR SAR OBJECT DETECTION AND A UNIFIED BENCHMARK

expected value yb
Z yn
yb =

x p(x)d x

(1)

y0

where x is the regression coordinate and p(x) is the
corresponding probability. Given the range of the label y
with minimum y0 and maximum yn (y0 ⩽ b
y ⩽ yn , n ∈ N ),
by quantizing the continuous regression range [y0 , yn ]
into the uniform discretized variable [y0 , y1 , . . . , yn ] with
nP subintervals. Given the discrete distribution property
n
y can be
i=0 p(yi ) = 1, the estimated regression value b
represented as
yb =

n
X

p(yi )yi .

As reflected by (8), the KD loss is reformulated into
a weighted sum of two terms. KL(b T ∥b S ) represents the
similarity between the teacher’s and the student’s binary
probabilities of the bounding box for the target. Thus,
we name it target probability distribution (TPD). Meanwhile,
KL( p̂ T ∥ p̂ S ) represents the similarity between the teacher’s and
the student’s probabilities among bounding boxes for nontarget. We name it nontarget probability distribution (NPD).
Obviously, TPD can significantly affect NPD because of the
presence of (1 − pt ). To transfer the localization knowledge
and solve the bounding boxes coupling, we introduce a
hyperparameter α to replace (1 − pt ). We can obtain the
following calculation:

(2)

i=0

Lkd =

Thus, p(x) can be easily implemented through a Softmax
layer consisting of n + 1 units.
2) Decoupled Bounding Boxes: The probability distribution
consisting of all predicted values is p = [ p(y0 ), p(y1 ),
. . . , p(yt ), . . . , p(yn )]. We can obtain the following equation:
p(yt )
pt = Pn
p(y j )
Pnj=0
i=0,i̸=t p(yi )
p\t = Pn
j=0 p(y j )

5211314

(3)
(4)

where pt represents target probability and p\t represents
all the other nontarget probability. Meanwhile, we declare
p̂i to independently model probabilities among nontarget
p̂ = [ p0 , . . . , pt−1 , pt+1 , . . . , pn ]. Each element is calculated
as follows:
p(yi )
p̂i = Pn
.
(5)
j=0, j̸=t p(y j )
The traditional KD method uses KL-Divergence as the loss
function that can be written as

KD = KL p T ∥ p S
 T
 T
N
X
p
pt
T
T
+
pi log iS
(6)
= pt log
ptS
pi
i=0,i̸=t
where T is the teacher and S is the student. Comparing (3)
with (4), we can find pi = p̂i p\t , so we can rewrite (6) as
follows:
!
 T
N
T T
X
p̂
p
p
i
\t
KD = ptT log tS +
p\tT p̂iT log
pt
p̂iS p\tS
i=0,i̸=t
!
 T
p\tT
p
= ptT log tS + p\tT log
pt
p\tS
|
{z
}
KL(b T ∥b S )
 T
N
N
X
X
p̂
p̂iT = 1. (7)
+ p\tT
p̂iT log iS ,
p̂
i
i=0,i̸=t
i=0,i̸=t
|
{z
}
KL( p̂ tT ∥ p̂ tS )
Special, pt + p\t = 1. Equation (7) can be rewritten as



KD = KL b T ∥b S + 1 − ptT KL p̂t T ∥ p̂t S .
(8)

N
X

KL p T ∥ p S



t=0

=

N
X




KL b T ∥b S + αKL p̂ tT ∥ p̂ tS

(9)

t=0

where Lkd denotes the KD loss after decoupling.
Compared to KD, this strategy clearly requires N times
more computation. The greater N (in experiments, N is
often set to 1000), the more calculations. The above method
(166.76 h) takes about four times longer to train than KD
(42.12 h) and LD (41.50 h), which significantly increases
training time and weakening the benefit of logit distillation.
To solve this problem, we propose a method to partition the
bounding boxes according to the category prior knowledge
of the teacher network. As shown in Fig. 2(a), we employ
the one-hot method to convert classification predictions into
hard labels in the classification branch of the model. The
regression branch is then guided by this hard label to split
the bounding boxes. Finally, we use Softmax(·, τ ) to
convert the bounding boxes into a probability distribution.
The probability distribution may provide more valuable
information when τ > 1. Thus, (9) can be rewritten as follows:

Lkd = KL m T ∥m S
c
X



=
KL m tT ∥m tS + αKL m̂ t T ∥m̂ t S
(10)
t=0

where c indicates the number of categories, m t denotes the set
of all probability distributions belonging to the tth category,
and m̂ t denotes the set of all probability distributions with
category t removed.
C. IoU-Based Weighting Module
Since the resolution and imaging mechanism of the two
modalities is different, the candidate bounding boxes of the
teacher network are also not accurate. Existing methods tend
to learn all candidate bounding boxes equally, which results
in the inference of student networks being affected by lowquality candidate boxes.
To help the student network focus on high-quality candidate
bounding boxes, an IWM is designed that adaptively modifies
the weight of each candidate bounding box depending on the
matching IoU score in the teacher network. The IWM gives

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:12:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5211314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

Fig. 3. Visualization of optical and SAR image pairs in OGSOD-1.0, where bridges, harbors, and oil tanks are indicated by green, blue, and yellow boxes,
respectively. Despite using static objects for annotation, images from various time periods still include missing objects (e.g., the green dashed box in the SAR
image), revealing our dataset is more challenging.

higher weights to high-quality candidate bounding boxes. The
IWM improves the efficiency of localization distillation by
effectively focusing on high-quality candidate bounding boxes,
thus robustly improving the performance of student networks.
As shown in Fig. 2(b), we first calculate the IoU [36] scores
for the different network layer candidate bounding boxes in the
teacher network. The IoU score ai of layer i (three network
layers of YOLOv5 inference, 1 ⩽ i ⩽ 3) is calculated as
follows:

ai = IoU BiT , B G
(11)
where BiT indicates the bounding boxes of layer i of the
teacher network output, B G indicates GT boxes. Then, the
IoU score ai is used as the weight of the current candidate
bounding box to focus on high-quality bounding boxes. The
final distillation loss is as follows:
Lkd =

3
X

ai L kd BiT ∥BiS



(12)

i=1

where BiT and BiS denote the candidate bounding boxes for
the teacher and the student network outputs, respectively.
D. Loss Function
The inputs of CoLD are optical images and SAR
images. The optical images are first fed into the teacher
network and the different category prior knowledge is
extracted and fed into the CPM. Then, the SAR images are fed
into the student network. After processing by the CPM, the
student network generates candidate bounding boxes with rich

knowledge. Finally, the IWM applies an adaptive focusing on
high-quality knowledge. The entire network is trained using
online KD (OKD) and the teacher network guides the student
network as they train. The teacher loss is calculated as follows:


LT (21 ) = Lcls C T ∥C G + Lreg B T ∥B G

(13)

where 21 denotes the parameter set of the teacher network,
C T denotes categories of the teacher network output, and C G
denotes the corresponding GT. The student loss is calculated
as follows:



L S (22 ) = Lcls C T ∥C G + Lreg B T ∥B G + Lkd B T ∥B S
(14)
where 22 denotes the parameter set of the student network.
Here we use complete intersection over union (CIoU) [36]
since it gives higher priority to the locations closer to the
object’s center. Rather than simply discarding low-quality
bounding boxes, the IWM dynamically adjusts the contribution
of bounding boxes through weighting. Because the missing
teacher knowledge is not representative of the true distribution
of the data, which is detrimental to the performance of the
detector.
IV. DATASET
In this section, we will introduce our OGSOD-1.0 dataset
including existing datasets, dataset construction, and dataset
challenges.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:12:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CoLD FOR SAR OBJECT DETECTION AND A UNIFIED BENCHMARK

5211314

and SAR image pairs and a test set of 3666 SAR-only
images, containing over 48 000 instance annotations in total.
The distributions of instance scales in the OGSOD-1.0 dataset
are shown in Fig. 4, which shows that although there are
multiscale objects, most of them are concentrated at smaller
scales. This indicates that our dataset OGSOD-1.0 has a
significant challenge.
C. Dataset Challenges

Fig. 4.
Statistical distribution of object sizes in OGSOD-1.0. Bridges,
harbors, and oil tanks are shown in red, blue, and yellow, respectively. LWR
indicates length-to-width ratio of the object’s bounding box.

A. Existing Datasets
Zhang et al. [13] construct an oil tank detection dataset
for the study of optical image-guided SAR image object
detection. While this dataset contains 3401 pairs of fullpolarized SAR images and corresponding optical images.
Only 820 pairs of images containing oil tanks are selected
for labeling. Furthermore, only 18 000+ tank instances are
labeled. Therefore, we propose a new dataset for optical
image-guided SAR image object detection tasks.
B. Dataset Construction
The SAR images in OGSOD-1.0 are collected from the
Chinese GaoFen-3 satellite in C-band, Vertical-Vertical (VV)
and Vertical-Horizontal (VH) polarization modes. These SAR
images are provided by the 38th Research Institute, China
Electronics Technology Group Corporation, and the resolution
of SAR images is 3 m. The optical images are provided by
Google Earth, and the resolution is 10 m.
For the training set, aligning moving objects in the images
is an obstacle due to temporal phase inconsistencies, and this
can significantly affect the performance of object detection.
Therefore, we obtain the optical images of the corresponding
locations on Google Earth with a time difference of less than
one month according to the latitude, longitude and imaging
time provided by the SAR images. We map the optical and
SAR images to the same spatial resolution using the ENVI
software and then align them. Then, we crop the image pairs
into 256 × 256 pixel slices. To mitigate the effects of moving
objects, we annotate static objects, such as bridges, harbors
and oil tanks. In addition, to increase the diversity of the
training set, we obtain Michael Schmitt’s consent to extend
our dataset by selecting an additional 3000 sample pairs from
the SEN1-2 [37] dataset. Therefore, the training set contains
14 665 optical and SAR image pairs. Examples of image pairs
are shown in Fig. 3, these objects are well-identified and
informative in the optical image, whereas they are difficult
for a nonexpert to identify in the SAR image.
To simulate the scenario of lacking simultaneous phase
data during inference, we construct a test set with 3666 SAR
images, with the size of 256 × 256 pixel slices. Therefore,
the OGSOD-1.0 consists of a training set of 14 665 optical

Although the OGSOD-1.0 dataset is manually aligned and
screened, there are still many challenges. In summary, the
difficulties in OGSOD-1.0 are mainly divided into three
aspects.
1) Due to the different imaging times and imaging
resolutions of satellites, some spatial transformations
must be performed during alignment. This can lose some
of the original information of the data and interfere with
the extraction of object features. Besides, the presence
of moving objects can exacerbate this situation.
2) SAR images have more noise than optical images
due to the satellite’s different incident angles, imaging
mechanisms and environmental factors. While using
optical images to guide SAR image detection often
introduces clutter noise information to interfere with
object detection.
3) The large variation in scale of objects in the dataset
which contains many small objects. Especially the
similarity of the background to the objects increases the
challenge of object detection.
In addition, we select images with strong background
noise interference to artificially increase the challenges of our
dataset.
V. E XPERIMENTS AND D ISCUSSION
In this section, the proposed CoLD and other state-of-the-art
methods are comprehensively evaluated on the OGSOD-1.0
dataset. First, the implementation details of the CoLD are
described in Section V-A, and the evaluation metrics are
described in Section V-B. Then, the effectiveness of our
CoLD is investigated in Section V-C, ablation experiments
and visualizations are reported in Section V-D. Finally,
we compare advanced oriented object detection methods
in Section V-E.
A. Implementation Details
Our method is trained on a platform with an NVIDIA
RTX 3090 GPU, and the implementation is based on the public
platform PyTorch [47]. In our proposed CoLD, we generally
set the batch size to 64, the image size to 256 × 256 and
the epoch to 400. YOLOv5 is modified to be a two-branch
cross-modal teacher–student network while ensuring the same
data enhancement for both optical and SAR images. For the
teacher network input branch, we consistently use optical
images. In the training stage, we use optical and SAR images
to train the optical branch and the SAR branch separately,
while in the inference stage only the SAR images are input
for inference. To be consistent with the baseline and other
SAR object detection methods, we set input image size as
256 × 256.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:12:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5211314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

TABLE I
C OMPARISON W ITH THE S TATE - OF - THE -A RT O BJECT D ETECTION M ETHODS ON O UR P ROPOSED OGSOD-1.0 DATASET W ITH SAR I MAGES . C AND S
D ENOTE C ROSS -M ODAL M ETHODS AND S INGLE -M ODAL M ETHODS , R ESPECTIVELY. HBB D ENOTES H ORIZONTAL B OUNDING B OX

We use a stochastic gradient descent (SGD) optimizer
with an initial learning rate of 10−2 , a momentum of 0.937,
and a weight decay of 5 × 10−4 . Then the entire network
is trained in an end-to-end manner. For data enhancement,
we have used Mosaic [48] and Mixup [49]. To ensure
fairness, we set uniform settings for training and inference
of other hyperparameters, such as temperature τ = 20 in
SoftMax(·, τ ), α = 2.
B. Evaluation Metrics
All models are evaluated with two object detection metrics:
mean average precision (AP) and AP50
n
n Z
1X
1X 1
AP =
APi =
Pi (r )dr
(15)
n i=0
n i=0 0
Z 1
APi =
Pi (r )dr
0
Z 1
=
Precision d(Recall)
0


Z 1
TP
TP
=
d
.
(16)
TP + FN
0 TP + FP
When IoU value between a predicted box and the GT
meets the predefined threshold, this box is represented as true
positive (TP). Otherwise, this box is considered as a false
positive (FP). False negative (FN) means there is a true target,
but the detector does not find it. Equation (16) indicates that
AP is the integral of the precision-recall curve (PRC) for each
category. AP50 computes the mean of all the AP values for all
categories at IoU = 0.50 in (15). Similarly, AP is the primary
challenge metric, which can be formulated as the mean at IoU
= 0.50 : 0.05 : 0.95.
C. Quantitative and Qualitative Evaluation
To verify the effectiveness of our CoLD, we conduct
optical image-guided SAR image object detection experiments

on our proposed OGSOD-1.0 dataset. We report the results
with nine state-of-the-art SAR object detection methods
and four cross-modal KD methods, including anchor-based
models YOLOv3 [39], YOLOv5 [34] and YOLOv7 [45],
anchor-free models Sparse R-CNN [43], RetinaNet [38],
adaptive training sample selection (ATSS) [41], representative points (RepPoints) [40], Generalized Focal [42] and
Object_Box [44], and cross-modal KD methods KD [27],
decoupled knowledge distillation (DKD) [15], LD [14], and
general instance (GI) Imitation [46].
As shown in Table I, our method CoLD achieves an
improvement of 10.4% and 0.8% with optical image guidance
compared to SAR object detection methods and cross-modal
KD methods. Different SAR models vary considerably in
terms of performance, mainly because some methods are
not applicable to SAR images. YOLOv5 performs well on
evaluation metrics among the SAR models due to better
generalization capabilities of YOLOv5, especially for small
objects. Among the cross-modal KD methods, KD and DKD
transfer only class knowledge from optical images, resulting
in poor accuracy. Localization knowledge is particularly
important in object detection. Compared to KD and DKD,
LD and GI Imitation transfer object localization knowledge
in optical images with better results. LD transfers localization
knowledge through the probability distribution of the bounding
box and GI Imitation transfers localization knowledge by
minimizing the feature similarity of the region of interest.
By introducing category prior knowledge from optical images
and leveraging the localization knowledge of the teacher
network, our CoLD achieves the best performance.
Our model not only achieves good performance on the
evaluation metrics AP but also gains significant improvements
in perceptual quality. As shown in Fig. 5, our CoLD can
obtain more guidance information from different knowledge
in the optical images, and reduce missed and our model
achieves good performance detection rates. Especially for
small objects, our method achieves a huge improvement in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:12:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CoLD FOR SAR OBJECT DETECTION AND A UNIFIED BENCHMARK

5211314

Fig. 5. Cross-modal KD strategies are visually compared. KD and DKD do not employ localization information, which leads to occasionally missed
detections, while LD improves the results somewhat but falls short of GI Imitation. Our method is more accurate and has fewer missed detections according
to the inference result. The red and purple boxes indicate false positive and false negative, respectively.
TABLE II
T RAINING R ESULTS FOR M IXED DATA , U SING O NLY SAR I MAGES IN THE
I NFERENCE S TAGE . M IX O PTICAL -SAR R EPRESENTS A M IXTURE OF
O PTICAL I MAGES AND SAR I MAGES

SAR images. Even with a large amount of clutter noise in
the SAR images, our model performs well when guided by
the optical images. By contrast, there are missed detections
for KD, DKD, and LD, and error detections for KD, DKD,
LD, and GI Imitation. The major reason for the low accuracy
of KD and DKD is the localization knowledge in the optical
image that is ignored and LD fails to consider the coupling of
bounding boxes. These methods make insufficient use of the
optical image guidance information, which makes them detect
unsatisfactory objects. The visualization results illustrate that
CoLD can obtain more guidance information from the optical
images and therefore can better detect objects.
To further confirm the efficacy of our strategy, as shown
in Fig. 6, we visualize the learning attention map using
GradCAM. YOLOv5 does not focus effectively on smaller
bridges and oil tanks, as seen by the visualization results.
While DKD focuses on the targets more thoroughly, it also
focuses on a great quantity of background noise. Compared
with other methods, our CoLD improves object focus and
reduces background noise, outperforming the feature-based
method of GI Imitation.
Compared with cross-modal KD methods, the number of
parameters of our proposed method is comparable. As shown

in Fig. 7(b), for the training time, KD, DKD, and LD use less
time but achieve less accuracy, while GI Imitation achieves
good accuracy with a high training cost. CoLD increases
a little of training time but achieves the highest accuracy.
Given the huge improvement in accuracy, the increase in
the number of parameters and training time is acceptable.
Our CoLD makes a great trade-off between consumption and
performance.
To verify the generality of our method, we have
implemented our method on Object_Box [44]. As shown in
Fig. 7(c), our method is effective in improving the performance
of the student model. In particular, in a multimodal method,
we must assess if the CoLD’s efficacy is brought about by
training with mixed data. As shown in Table II, training
with mixed data does not increase the accuracy of detection.
It validates that the improvement is not derived from training
with mixed data but from our method’s efficacy.
D. Ablation Experiments
1) Effectiveness of TCLD and NCLD: To validate the
capability of our designed CPM to mine guidance information,
we divide all bounding boxes into two parts, each called
target category localization distillation (TCLD) and nontarget
category localization distillation (NCLD). As shown in
Table III, TCLD gets an improvement of 3.9% (from 46.3%
to 50.2%) in AP, and NCLD gets an improvement of
10.0% (from 46.3% to 56.3%) in AP. Intuitively, TCLD
concentrates on the knowledge related to the target category
since the corresponding loss function considers only binary
probabilities. Conversely, NCLD focuses on the knowledge
among nontarget categories. We notice that singly applying

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:12:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5211314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

Fig. 6. Visualization of the learning attention map using GradCAM. The results show that our method allows for a better focus on the position of the object
and has very little background noise. The SAR object detection method cannot effectively focus on the location of the oil tanks without the guidance of
optical images. Cross-modal methods do not take full advantage of the information in optical images, resulting in the introduction of more background noise.

Fig. 7. (a) Performance comparison of using different IoUs (e.g., IoU, CIoU, DIoU, or GIoU) in IWM. (b) Training time (h) versus accuracy (AP50 ) on
OGSOD-1.0. The figure shows the accuracy and training time for each method. (c) Performance of CoLD in different methods. The results show that our
method is strongly generalizable. (d) Performance comparison between online and offline distillation. The results show that online distillation allows the
network to converge faster and gives lower loss values.

TCLD could be less helpful for the student. However,
the distillation performance of NCLD is comparable and
even better than the LD. According to (8), TCLD transfers
knowledge via the binary classification task, which could be
related to the difficulty of the sample. For instance, a training
sample with pt = 0.95 could be easier for the student to learn
compared with another one with pt = 0.63. Therefore, we use
α to replace 1 − pt , giving a 10.4% (from 46.3% to 56.7%)
improvement to the model.
2) Effectiveness of IWM, OKD, and CPM: To research the
performance differences of different IoU in IWM modules,
we use different IoU methods [e.g., CIoU, distance intersection
over union (DIoU), or generalized intersection over union
(GIoU)] to weight the distillation loss. The results are shown
in Fig. 7(a). Compared to the baseline, our proposed IWM
achieves the highest improvement with the introduction of
CIoU. This result proves that there is low-quality knowledge
in the teacher network. Therefore, we need to use a strategy
to focus on high-quality knowledge.

TABLE III
A BLATION E XPERIMENTS W ITH TCLD AND NCLD. TCLD I NDICATES
TARGET C ATEGORY L OCATION D ISTILLATION , AND NCLD I NDICATES
N ONTARGET C ATEGORY L OCATION D ISTILLATION . T HE A BLATION
R ESULTS (HBB) S UGGEST T HAT TCLD K NOWLEDGE C OULD
N OT BE AS I MPORTANT AS K NOWLEDGE A MONG NCLD

To further improve the efficiency of the teacher network
in transferring knowledge, we analyze OKD in depth. The
experimental results are shown in Fig. 7(d), student models
can converge faster in classification and regression. Offline KD
entails using a pretrained teacher network to transfer learned
knowledge to the student network. However, this method

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:12:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CoLD FOR SAR OBJECT DETECTION AND A UNIFIED BENCHMARK

5211314

TABLE IV

TABLE VI

A BLATION E XPERIMENTS OF OKD, CPM, AND IWM ON THE
OGSOD-1.0 (HBB). OKD I NDICATES O NLINE KD. CPM AND IWM
D ENOTE C ATEGORY-O RIENTED PARTITION M ODULE AND
I O U-BASED W EIGHTING M ODULE , R ESPECTIVELY

E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF O PTICAL I MAGES AND SAR I MAGES OF
C O LD U NDER D IFFERENT C ONDITIONS ON O UR P ROPOSED OSPRC
DATASET. SAR-VV AND SAR-VH A RE T WO D IFFERENT P OLAR IZATION M ODES OF SAR I MAGING . OPT-10 M AND OPT-20 M
R EPRESENT O PTICAL I MAGES W ITH D IFFERENT S PATIAL
R ESOLUTIONS , W HILE OPT-C LOUD R EPRESENTS AN
O PTICAL I MAGE W ITH C LOUD O CCLUSION

TABLE V
E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT C OMBINATIONS OF KD
M ETHODS (HBB). A LTHOUGH O UR M ETHOD C O LD O NLY D ISTILLS
K NOWLEDGE T HROUGH THE R EGRESSION B RANCH , I T C AN
E FFECTIVELY I NTRODUCE C ATEGORY P RIOR K NOWLEDGE

ignores disparities in learning ability between the teacher
and student network. The student network is unaware of the
teacher network’s learning method and direction. In contrast,
in the online distillation method, the student network can learn
about the learning process of the teacher network and increase
network performance by learning from the teacher’s learning
abilities.
To illustrate the complementarity and effectiveness of the
three modules, we introduce different combinations of CPM,
IWM, and OKD for guidance. As shown in Table IV, CPM
gets an improvement of 3.4% (from 46.3% to 49.7%) in
AP, and OKD gets an improvement of 5.6% (from 46.3%
to 51.9%) in AP. IWM is dependent on the output of CPM
and therefore cannot be used on its own. This approach
(CPM + IWM) fully transfers knowledge from the optical
image and gets better performance. When using all three
modules for guidance at the same time, our proposed CoLD
gets an improvement of 10.4% (from 46.3% to 56.7%) in AP.
The results of ablation experiments validate the effectiveness
of three different modules from optical images and the
capability of our proposed CoLD to fully exploit guidance
information. Our CoLD achieves better results by integrating
complementary information from optical images.
Our CoLD is the first attempt to adopt logit mimicking to
distill localization knowledge for optical images. We combine
the probability distribution representation for bounding boxes
and the KL-Divergence loss and demonstrate that such a
simple logit mimicking technique performs well in improving
the distillation performance of object detectors. From Table V,
CoLD gets an improvement of 10.4% in AP. KD and DKD

are distilled in the classification branch. LD and CoLD are
distilled in the regression branch, and the other methods are
distilled in both branches. To efficiently transfer information
from optical images, it is best to transfer knowledge from both
the classification branch and the regression branch (e.g., LD +
DKD). To demonstrate that CoLD can transfer classification
and localization knowledge using only regression branches,
we do four additional sets of experiments (LD + KD, LD +
DKD, CoLD + KD, and CoLD + DKD). LD + KD achieves
an AP of 55.8% and LD + DKD achieves an AP of 56.2%,
which both get significant improvements compared to LD
(51.9%). However, compared to CoLD (56.7%), CoLD + KD
decreases the AP by 0.7% (from 56.7% to 56.0%) suggesting
that CoLD already achieves optimal performance and that
introducing KD affects performance instead. CoLD + DKD
(56.6%) achieves comparable performance to CoLD, which
also indicates that CoLD has already introduced optimal
classification knowledge.
3) Effects of Different Parameters on Optical and SAR
Images: To evaluate the effect of different parameter images
on the performance of the method, we construct a small dataset
called optical and SAR images paired dataset with influencing
factors such as polarization modes, resolution, and cloud
occlusion (OSPRC): it consists of images from Sentinel-1 and
Sentinel-2. The SAR images have two different polarization
modes and the optical images include 10-m resolution, 20-m
resolution, and cloud-occluded images. The dataset is divided
into five sets of images, each containing 3300 images of size
256 × 256 pixels, and divided into a training set and a test set
in a ratio of 8:2. As shown in Table VI, the results show that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:12:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5211314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

TABLE VII
C OMPARISON W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT O RIENTED O BJECT D ETECTION M ETHODS ON O UR P ROPOSED OGSOD-1.0 DATASET W ITH SAR I MAGES .
C AND S D ENOTE C ROSS -M ODAL M ETHODS AND S INGLE -M ODAL M ETHODS , R ESPECTIVELY. OBB D ENOTES O RIENTED B OUNDING B OX

the influence of different polarization modes is small, while
the influence of resolution and cloud cover is greater.
In optical image-guided SAR image object detection tasks,
different resolutions of optical images can improve the
performance of the SAR detector. As shown in Table VI,
OPT-10m image and OPT-20m image-guided SAR image
object detection increase the AP50 by 4.7% and 2.6%,
respectively. Interestingly, despite the low-quality of OPT-20m
(AP50 41%), it can still significantly improve the performance
of SAR-VV object detection. The results of our analysis found
that 1532 of the 1891 objects in the SAR-VV predictions
and 1653 objects in the OPT-20m predictions intersect. This
means that OPT-20m still provides an additional 121 highquality knowledge for SAR-VV. In contrast, the intersection
of SAR-VV and OPT-Cloud (1306) has 1301, indicating that
the additional high-quality knowledge provided to SAR-VV by
OPT-Cloud is almost negligible. The results show that CoLD
can effectively mine high-quality knowledge in optical images.
It is worth noting that as OPT-Cloud contains a lot of
low-quality information, it can reduce the performance of the
student model. Our proposed IWM module can suppress these
low-quality information. As shown in Table VI, the OPTCloud-guided SAR-VV decreases the AP50 by 7.9% (from
59.4% to 51.5%) without the IWM module. After adding
IWM, OPT-Cloud-guided SAR-VV decreases the AP50 only
0.9% (from 59.4% to 58.5%). The results show that IWM can
effectively suppress low-quality information.
To verify the effectiveness of CoLD in SAR image-guided
optical image object detection tasks, we add the experiment
of SAR image-guided optical image. As shown in Table VI,
SAR-VV-guided OPT-20m increases the AP50 by 15.7% (from
51.9% to 67.6%) and SAR-VV-guided OPT-Cloud increases
the AP50 by 4.5% (from 41.0% to 45.5%). The results show
that CoLD is equally effective in SAR-guided optical image
object detection tasks.
E. Oriented Object Detection
In the field of remote sensing, rotated labels can better
describe some objects with relatively large aspect ratios
in images. Therefore, we provide rotated box labels for
the dataset OGSOD-1.0 and compare it with some stateof-the-art methods for oriented object detection. As shown

in Table VII, our method CoLD performs well under the
OGSOD-1.0 (SAR) metric with excellent detection accuracy
of 68.0% AP50 and 35.9% AP. Compared to YOLOv5 OBB
(baseline), our method does not bring a large computational
burden, while providing excellent computational efficiency and
real-time performance. In contrast, Rotated RepPoints [40]
and Rotated fully convolutional one-stage object detection
(FCOS) [50] perform well in terms of AP, but they have
lower frames/s (FPS) and slower-computational-speed. Singleshot alignment network (S2A-Net) [51] and shape-adaptive
selection and measurement (SASM) [53] perform well in
terms of both AP and FPS, but have a higher computational
burden. Oriented R-CNN [52] performs well in terms of AP50
and AP, but has a high-computational burden and requires
high hardware devices. Kalman filtering intersection over
union (KFIoU) [54] is a novel method to computing IoU
that can handle rotated objects better, but performs poorly in
AP and FPS. Rotated real-time models for object detection
(RTMDet) [55] uses cross stage partial ResNeXt (CSPNeXt),
suggesting the next dimension (ResNeXt) as the backbone
network, similar to our method, but with a high-computational
burden. In summary, our method CoLD has some advantages
in terms of performance and computational efficiency, and it
can also provide better detection accuracy.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we construct a new benchmark dataset
OGSOD-1.0 for optical image-guided SAR image object
detection tasks. This is the first optical image-guided SAR
image dataset for multiobject detection. On our proposed
OGSOD-1.0, we perform extensive experimental analysis of
some SAR object detection and cross-modal KD methods.
In particular, a novel CoLD method has been designed
to progressively transfer object-level knowledge in optical
images. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed CoLD.
In future work, we will investigate strategies to further
improve the CoLD architecture by utilizing more advanced
techniques, e.g., orientation-sensitive heatmap, making it
more applicable to oriented object detection tasks. Moreover,
we will further extend the dataset OGSOD-1.0 with the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:12:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: CoLD FOR SAR OBJECT DETECTION AND A UNIFIED BENCHMARK

addition of more scenarios and environmental factors to inspire
further research on this topic.
R EFERENCES
[1] L. Wang, X. Bai, C. Gong, and F. Zhou, “Hybrid inference network
for few-shot SAR automatic target recognition,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 9257–9269, Nov. 2021.
[2] C. Cao, Z. Cao, and Z. Cui, “LDGAN: A synthetic aperture radar
image generation method for automatic target recognition,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 3495–3508, May 2020.
[3] X. Yang, X. Zhang, N. Wang, and X. Gao, “A robust one-stage
detector for multiscale ship detection with complex background in
massive SAR images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5217712.
[4] C. He, M. Tu, D. Xiong, F. Tu, and M. Liao, “A component-based multilayer parallel network for airplane detection in SAR imagery,” Remote
Sens., vol. 10, no. 7, p. 1016, Jun. 2018.
[5] D. Hong, L. Gao, J. Yao, B. Zhang, A. Plaza, and J. Chanussot, “Graph
convolutional networks for hyperspectral image classification,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 5966–5978, Jul. 2021.
[6] D. Hong et al., “SpectralFormer: Rethinking hyperspectral image
classification with transformers,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 5518615.
[7] X. Wu, D. Hong, J. Tian, J. Chanussot, W. Li, and R. Tao, “ORSIm
detector: A novel object detection framework in optical remote sensing
imagery using spatial-frequency channel features,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 5146–5158, Jul. 2019.
[8] X. Wu, D. Hong, and J. Chanussot, “UIU-Net: U-Net in U-Net for
infrared small object detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 32,
pp. 364–376, 2023.
[9] Y. Du, L. Du, and L. Li, “An SAR target detector based on gradient
harmonized mechanism and attention mechanism,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
Sens. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 1–5, 2022.
[10] Z. Cui, Q. Li, Z. Cao, and N. Liu, “Dense attention pyramid networks for
multi-scale ship detection in SAR images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 8983–8997, Nov. 2019.
[11] Y. Hou and L. Zheng, “Visualizing adapted knowledge in domain
transfer,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 13824–13833.
[12] L. Wang, Y. Chae, S.-H. Yoon, T.-K. Kim, and K.-J. Yoon,
“EvDistill: Asynchronous events to end-task learning via bidirectional
reconstruction-guided cross-modal knowledge distillation,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 608–619.
[13] R. Zhang et al., “Optical-enhanced oil tank detection in high-resolution
SAR images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5237112.
[14] Z. Zheng et al., “Localization distillation for dense object detection,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2022, pp. 9407–9416.
[15] B. Zhao, Q. Cui, R. Song, Y. Qiu, and J. Liang, “Decoupled knowledge
distillation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 11953–11962.
[16] L. M. Novak, M. C. Burl, and W. W. Irving, “Optimal polarimetric
processing for enhanced target detection,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron.
Syst., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 234–244, Jan. 1993.
[17] L. Li, L. Du, and Z. Wang, “Target detection based on dual-domain
sparse reconstruction saliency in SAR images,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl.
Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 4230–4243, Nov. 2018.
[18] L. Zhang and C. Liu, “A novel saliency-driven oil tank detection method
for synthetic aperture radar images,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust.,
Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), May 2020, pp. 2608–2612.
[19] R. Min, H. Lan, Z. Cao, and Z. Cui, “A gradually distilled CNN for
SAR target recognition,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 42190–42200, 2019.
[20] Y.-L. Chang, A. Anagaw, L. Chang, Y. Wang, C.-Y. Hsiao, and
W.-H. Lee, “Ship detection based on YOLOv2 for SAR imagery,”
Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 7, p. 786, Apr. 2019.
[21] Z. Wu, B. Hou, B. Ren, Z. Ren, S. Wang, and L. Jiao, “A deep
detection network based on interaction of instance segmentation and
object detection for SAR images,” Remote Sens., vol. 13, no. 13, p. 2582,
Jul. 2021.

5211314

[22] D. Hong, J. Hu, J. Yao, J. Chanussot, and X. X. Zhu, “Multimodal
remote sensing benchmark datasets for land cover classification with
a shared and specific feature learning model,” ISPRS J. Photogramm.
Remote Sens., vol. 178, pp. 68–80, Aug. 2021.
[23] D. Hong et al., “More diverse means better: Multimodal deep learning
meets remote-sensing imagery classification,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 4340–4354, May 2021.
[24] C. Zhang et al., “A domain adaptation neural network for change
detection with heterogeneous optical and SAR remote sensing images,”
Int. J. Appl. Earth Observ. Geoinf., vol. 109, May 2022, Art. no. 102769.
[25] Q. Gao, Z. Feng, S. Yang, Z. Chang, and R. Wang, “Multi-path
interactive network for aircraft identification with optical and SAR
images,” Remote Sens., vol. 14, no. 16, p. 3922, Aug. 2022.
[26] Y. Shi, L. Du, Y. Guo, and Y. Du, “Unsupervised domain adaptation
based on progressive transfer for ship detection: From optical to
SAR images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5230317.
[27] J. Bae, D. Yeo, J. Yim, N. Kim, C. Pyo, and J. Kim, “Densely distilled
flow-based knowledge transfer in teacher–student framework for image
classification,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 29, pp. 5698–5710,
2020.
[28] W.-C. Chen, C.-C. Chang, and C.-R. Lee, “Knowledge distillation
with feature maps for image classification,” in Proc. 14th Asian
Conf. Comput. Vis. (ACCV). Perth, Australia: Springer, Dec. 2018,
pp. 200–215.
[29] Q. Li, S. Jin, and J. Yan, “Mimicking very efficient network for object
detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jul. 2017, pp. 6356–6364.
[30] J. Guo et al., “Distilling object detectors via decoupled features,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 2154–2164.
[31] L. Zhang and K. Ma, “Improve object detection with feature-based
knowledge distillation: Towards accurate and efficient detectors,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2021, pp. 1–14.
[32] J. Kang et al., “DisOptNet: Distilling semantic knowledge from optical
images for weather-independent building segmentation,” IEEE Trans.
Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022, Art. no. 4706315.
[33] L. Zhao, X. Peng, Y. Chen, M. Kapadia, and D. N. Metaxas, “Knowledge
as priors: Cross-modal knowledge generalization for datasets without
superior knowledge,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 6528–6537.
[34] G. Jocher et al., “Ultralytics/YOLOv5: V5.0—YOLOv5-P6 1280
models, AWS, supervise.ly and YouTube integrations,” Zenodo, 2021.
[35] X. Li et al., “Generalized focal loss: Learning qualified and distributed
bounding boxes for dense object detection,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 33, 2020, pp. 21002–21012.
[36] Z. Zheng, P. Wang, W. Liu, J. Li, R. Ye, and D. Ren, “Distance-IoU
loss: Faster and better learning for bounding box regression,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 34, 2020, pp. 12993–13000.
[37] M. Schmitt, L. H. Hughes, and X. X. Zhu, “The SEN1–2 dataset for
deep learning in SAR-optical data fusion,” 2018, arXiv:1807.01569.
[38] T. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal loss for
dense object detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2017, pp. 2980–2988.
[39] J. Redmon and A. Farhadi, “YOLOv3: An incremental improvement,”
2018, arXiv:1804.02767.
[40] Z. Yang, S. Liu, H. Hu, L. Wang, and S. Lin, “RepPoints: Point
set representation for object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 9657–9666.
[41] S. Zhang, C. Chi, Y. Yao, Z. Lei, and S. Z. Li, “Bridging the gap between
anchor-based and anchor-free detection via adaptive training sample
selection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9759–9768.
[42] Y. He, C. Zhu, J. Wang, M. Savvides, and X. Zhang, “Bounding
box regression with uncertainty for accurate object detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019,
pp. 2888–2897.
[43] P. Sun et al., “Sparse R-CNN: End-to-end object detection with learnable
proposals,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 14454–14463.
[44] M. Zand, A. Etemad, and M. Greenspan, “ObjectBox: From centers to
boxes for anchor-free object detection,” 2022, arXiv:2207.06985.
[45] C.-Y. Wang, A. Bochkovskiy, and H.-Y. M. Liao, “YOLOv7: Trainable
bag-of-freebies sets new state-of-the-art for real-time object detectors,”
2022, arXiv:2207.02696.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:12:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5211314

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 61, 2023

[46] X. Dai et al., “General instance distillation for object detection,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
pp. 7842–7851.
[47] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
learning library,” in Proc. Adv. neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019,
pp. 1–12.
[48] A. Bochkovskiy, C.-Y. Wang, and H.-Y. M. Liao, “YOLOv4: Optimal
speed and accuracy of object detection,” 2020, arXiv:2004.10934.
[49] H. Zhang, M. Cisse, Y. N. Dauphin, and D. Lopez-Paz, “mixup: Beyond
empirical risk minimization,” 2017, arXiv:1710.09412.
[50] Z. Tian, C. Shen, H. Chen, and T. He, “FCOS: Fully convolutional
one-stage object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 9627–9636.
[51] J. Han, J. Ding, J. Li, and G.-S. Xia, “Align deep features for oriented
object detection,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 60, 2022,
Art. no. 5602511.
[52] X. Xie, G. Cheng, J. Wang, X. Yao, and J. Han, “Oriented R-CNN for
object detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2021, pp. 3520–3529.
[53] L. Hou, K. Lu, J. Xue, and Y. Li, “Shape-adaptive selection and
measurement for oriented object detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
Intell., vol. 36, 2022, pp. 923–932.
[54] X. Yang et al., “The KFIoU loss for rotated object detection,” 2022,
arXiv:2201.12558.
[55] C. Lyu et al., “RTMDet: An empirical study of designing real-time object
detectors,” 2022, arXiv:2212.07784.

Chao Wang received the B.E. degree in network
engineering from West Anhui University, Lu’an,
China, in 2021. He is currently pursuing the M.S.
degree in computer science and technology with
Anhui University, Hefei, China.
His research interests include knowledge distillation and SAR object detection.

Rui Ruan received the bachelor’s and master’s
degrees from the School of Computer Science and
Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China, in
2013 and 2016, respectively.
She is currently a Lecturer with the School of
Internet, Anhui University. Her research interests
include deep learning-based object detection, image
enhancement, and remote sensing image analysis.

Zhicheng Zhao received the B.E. degree from
the National Pilot School of Software, Yunnan
University, Kunming, China, in 2016, and the Ph.D.
degree from the Computer Network Information
Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China, in 2021.
He is currently a Lecturer with the Information
Materials and Intelligent Sensing Laboratory of
Anhui Province, Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory
of Multimodal Cognitive Computation, School of
Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, Hefei,
China. He also serves as a Postdoctoral Researcher with 38th Research
Institute, China Electronics Technology Group Corporation, Hefei. His
research interests include computer vision and deep learning.

Chenglong Li received the M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees from the School of Computer Science and
Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China, in
2013 and 2016, respectively.
From 2014 to 2015, he was a Visiting Student
with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. He was a
Post-Doctoral Research Fellow with the Center for
Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing
(CRIPAC), National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR), Institute of Automation, Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CASIA), Beijing, China. He is currently a Professor
and a Ph.D. Supervisor with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Anhui
University. His research interests include computer vision and deep learning.

Jin Tang received the B.E. degree in automation
and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from
Anhui University, Hefei, China, in 1999 and 2007,
respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the School
of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui
University. His research interests include computer
vision, pattern recognition, machine learning, and
deep learning.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Tsinghua University. Downloaded on March 24,2026 at 08:12:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

